A lot can be learned from experts
on how to produce effective videos.
Many books were written on the topic.
In this video, we discuss
several important principles for
effective data validation.
According to one of the world's leading
experts on data validation Edward Craft,
a data graph should show the data and
induce the viewer to think
about the substance.
In order to achieve this,
he introduced the concept of data ink.
The idea is that a large share of ink
on a graph should present the data.
The share of Data-Ink is compared
in Ratio which is defined as
the Data-Ink divided by total
ink used to print the graph.
Here is an example graph
that we discussed before,
we have pointed out many
issues with this graph.
One that really stands out is the fact
that the Data-Ink Ratio is very low.
Much of the ink used to print the graph
has nothing to do with the data.
In fact, it is quite difficult to pick
out the data mine at first sight.
Even though adding the images of the house
in the background makes the graph more
interesting in some way.
It is actually a distracting in the end.
In this 3D effects on graphs also
decreases the Data-Ink Ratio.
Typically, it's 3D effects makes
really in a graph more difficult.
The third dimension in the graph does not
exist in the original data that makes
comparing data values difficult.
A graph should avoid distorting what the
data has to say, going back to 3D graphs.
In addition to having no Data-Ink Ratio,
this should be avoided also
because it stores a graph.
Our 3D perception is quite limited
compared to our 2D perception.
In 3D, the size of the bar
depends on how far it is from us.
We can make reading the values
likely very difficult.
Despite their popularity, most experts
warn against using 3D effects for
data graphs.
Pie charts should be avoided for
the same reason.
Which slice is big in this pie chart?
In fact, all six slices looks about
the same in the pie chart shown here.
Hiowever, when it plotted the same
data using the Pareto bar chart.
B is the largest under
the substantially bigger than B.
Because of this [INAUDIBLE] in difficulty,
most experts recommend that we
avoid the pie chart altogether.
A graph should maintain visual
correspondence to quantity.
This pie chart is the photograph created
by Excel that plotted the same data as
the previous pie graph.
Noticed that as the graph shows
that B is more than twice than D,
which we know is not true.
The reason for this perception is because
the vertical axis does not start at zero.
Which needs to misleading
their perception.
Starting axis of non-zero values
should avoided most of the time.
At a corner ray, we should avoid graphs
that are forced viewers to compare areas.
Here's a tree maps that I
showed in the previous video,
can you figure out which one is bigger?
Social security or [INAUDIBLE] events?
Just like in pie chart,
area comparison in a tree map can
be challenging for most people.
Here is another graph I showed
in data validation examples.
Here, the misleading realization
is created on purpose.
It was created by Americans United for
Life in a campaign against
Planned Parenthood.
Know that only starting and
ending year data is shown.
And the data from the years
in between is not shown, so
it appears that there is an upper
linear trend of abortion.
A massive downward linear trend for
cancer screenings and prevention services.
On the y axis, there are two series
of data with the same units.
The number of people served
by planned parenthood, but
each series is plot on a different scale.
This is down to hide the real information.
And to make a point about abortion
services are increasing and
the number of cancer screenings and
preventive services are decreasing.
The title mentions abortions up,
life savings procedures down,
which is redundant as that is what they
are attempting to show in the graph.
This chart looks at the same data
source as the first chart above, but
instead of hiding the data it
shows all the services provided by
Planned Parenthood from 2006 to 2013.
And they use one scale on axis to clearly
show the number of people served over
the years.
This is an example of a good visualization
and it clearly shows the services and
the trend with a simple line graph.
The graph has a high data-ink ratio,
labeling this down appropriately
without the need of a legend and
the title is clear.
I've shown but a sample of data
visualizations principles.
There are many others out there
I choose not to focus on.
I would command that you learn more
from other sources, books, websites,
blogs, etc.
Ultimately, you will develop
a strong taste and keen eye for
great data visualizations.
You will also be able to improve your own
data validation when it is called for.